Source: Principles of Data Science (OpenStax), Chapter 1 - "What Are Data and Data Science?"
Sections 1.1 (What Is Data Science?) and 1.2 (Data Science in Practice)
Full book: https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-data-science

Figure 1.1 Petroglyphs are one of the earliest types of data generated by humanity, providing vital information about the daily life of
the people who created them. (credit: modification of work “Indian petroglyphs (~100 B.C. to ~1540 A.D.) (Newspaper Rock,
southeastern Utah, USA) 24” by James St. John/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Chapter Outline
1.1 What Is Data Science?
1.2 Data Science in Practice
1.3 Data and Datasets
1.4 Using Technology for Data Science
1.5 Data Science with Python
Introduction
Many of us use the terms “data” and “data science,” but not necessarily with a lot of precision. This chapter will
define data science terminology and apply the terms in multiple fields. The chapter will also briefly introduce
the types of technology (such as statistical software, spreadsheets, and programming languages) that data
scientists use to perform their work and will then take a deeper dive into the use of Python for data analysis.
The chapter should help you build a technical foundation so that you can practice the more advanced data
science concepts covered in future chapters.
1.1 What Is Data Science?
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
• 1.1.1 Describe the goals of data science.
• 1.1.2 Explain the data science cycle and goals of each step in the cycle.
• 1.1.3 Explain the role of data management in the data science process.
Data science is a field of study that investigates how to collect, manage, and analyze data of all types in order
to retrieve meaningful information. Although we will describe data in more detail in Data and Datasets, you
can consider data to be any pieces of evidence or observations that can be analyzed to provide some insights.
In its earliest days, the work of data science was spread across multiple disciplines, including statistics,
mathematics, computer science, and social science. It was commonly believed that the job of data collection,
management, and analysis would be carried out by different types of experts, with each job independent of
one another. To be more specific, data collection was considered to be the province of so-called domain
experts (e.g., doctors for medical data, psychologists for psychological data, business analysts for sales,
logistic, and marketing data, etc.) as they had a full context of the data; data management was for computer
scientists/engineers as they knew how to store and process data in computing systems (e.g., a single
computer, a server, a data warehouse); and data analysis was for statisticians and mathematicians as they
knew how to derive some meaningful insights from data. Technological advancement brought about the
proliferation of data, muddying the boundaries between these jobs, as shown in Figure 1.2. Now, it is expected
that a data scientist or data science team will have some expertise in all three domains.
Figure 1.2 The Field of Data Science
One good example of this is the development of personal cell phones. In the past, households typically had
only one landline telephone, and the only data that was generated with the telephone was the list of phone
numbers called by the household members. Today the majority of consumers own a smartphone, which
contains a tremendous amount of data: photos, social media contacts, videos, locations (usually), and perhaps
health data (with the consumers’ consent), among many other things.
Is the data from a smartphone solely collected by domain experts who are specialized in photos, videos, and
such? Probably not. They are automatically logged and collected by the smartphone system itself, which is
designed by computer scientists/engineers. For a health care scientist to collect data from many individuals in
the “traditional” way, bringing patients into a laboratory and taking vital signs regularly over a period of time
takes a lot of time and effort. A smartphone application is a more efficient and productive method, from a data
collection perspective.
Data science tasks are often described as a process, and this section provides an overview for each step of that
process.
The Data Science Cycle
Data science tasks follow a process, called the data science cycle, which includes problem definition, then
data collection, preparation, analysis, and reporting, as illustrated in Figure 1.3. See this animation about data
science (https://openstax.org/r/youtube), which describes the data science cycle in much the same way.
Figure 1.3 The Data Science Cycle
Although data collection and preparation may sound like simple tasks compared to the more important work
of analysis, they are actually the most time- and effort-consuming steps in the data science cycle. According to
a survey conducted by Anaconda (2020), data scientists spend about half of the entire process in data
collection and cleaning, while data analysis and communication take about a quarter to a third of the time
each, depending on the job.
Problem Definition, Data Collection, and Data Preparation
The first step in the data science cycle is a precise definition of the problem statement to establish clear
objectives for the goal and scope of the data analysis project. Once the problem has been well defined, the
data must be generated and collected. Data collection is the systematic process of gathering information on
variables of interest. Data is often collected purposefully by domain experts to find answers to predefined
problems. One example is data on customer responses to a product satisfaction survey. These survey
questions will likely be crafted by the product sales and marketing representatives, who likely have a specific
plan for how they wish to use the response data once it is collected.
Not all data is generated this purposefully, though. A lot of data around our daily life is simply a by-product of
our activity. These by-products are kept as data because they could be used by others to find some helpful
insights later. One example is our web search histories. We use a web search engine like Google to search for
information about our interests, and such activity leaves a history of the search text we used on the Google
server. Google employees can utilize the records of numerous Google users in order to analyze common
search patterns, present accurate search results, and potentially, to display relatable advertisements back to
the searchers.
Often the collected data is not in an optimal form for analysis. It needs to be processed somehow so that it can
be analyzed, in the phase called data preparation or data processing. Suppose you work for Google and want
to know what kind of food people around the globe search about the most during the night. You have users’
search history from around the globe, but you probably cannot use the search history data as is. The search
keywords will probably be in different languages, and users live all around the Earth, so nighttime will vary by
each user’s time zone. Even then, some search keywords would have some typos, simply not make sense, or
even remain blank if the Google server somehow failed to store that specific search history record. Note that
all these scenarios are possible, and therefore data preparation should address these issues so that the actual
analysis can draw more accurate results. There are many different ways to manage these issues, which we will
discuss more fully in Collecting and Preparing Data.
Data Analysis
Once the data is collected and prepared, it must be analyzed in order to discover meaningful insights, a
process called data analysis. There are a variety of data analysis methods to choose from, ranging from
simple ones like checking minimum and maximum values, to more advanced ones such as modelling a
dependent variable. Most of the time data scientists start with simple methods and then move into more
advanced ones, based on what they want to investigate further. Descriptive Statistics: Statistical Measurements
and Probability Distributions and Inferential Statistics and Regression Analysis discuss when and how to use
different analysis methods. Time Series and Forecasting and Decision-Making Using Machine Learning Basics
discuss forecasting and decision-making.
1.1 • What Is Data Science? 11
Data Reporting
Data reporting involves the presentation of data in a way that will best convey the information learned from
data analysis. The importance of data reporting cannot be overemphasized. Without it, data scientists cannot
effectively communicate to their audience the insights they discovered in the data. Data scientists work with
domain experts from different fields, and it is their responsibility to communicate the results of their analysis
in a way that those domain experts can understand. Data visualization is a graphical way of presenting and
reporting data to point out the patterns, trends, and hidden insights; it involves the use of visual elements
such as charts, graphs, and maps to present data in a way that is easy to comprehend and analyze. The goal of
data visualization is to communicate information effectively and facilitate better decision-making. Data
visualization and basic statistical graphing, including how to create graphical presentations of data using
Python, are explored in depth in Visualizing Data. Further details on reporting results are discussed in
Reporting Results.
Data Management
In the early days of data analysis (when generated data was mostly structured and not quite so “big”), it was
possible to keep data in local storage (e.g., on a single computer or a portable hard drive). With this setup,
data processing and analysis was all done locally as well.
When so much more data began to be collected—much of it unstructured as well as structured—cloud-based
management systems were developed to store all the data on a designated server, outside a local computer. At
the same time, data scientists began to see that most of their time was being spent on data processing rather
than analysis itself. To address this concern, modern data management systems not only store the data itself
but also perform some basic processing on a cloud. These systems, referred to as data warehousing, store
and manage large volumes of data from various sources in a central location, enabling efficient retrieval and
analysis for business intelligence and decision-making. (Data warehousing is covered in more detail in
Handling Large Datasets.)
Today, enterprises simply subscribe to a cloud-warehouse service such as Amazon RedShift (which runs on the
Amazon Web Services) or Google BigQuery (which runs on the Google Cloud) instead of buying physical
storage and configuring data management/processing systems on their own. These services ensure the data
is safely stored and processed on the cloud, all without spending money on purchasing/maintaining physical
storage.
1.2 Data Science in Practice
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
• 1.2.1 Explain the interdisciplinary nature of data science in various fields.
• 1.2.2 Identify examples of data science applications in various fields.
• 1.2.3 Identify current issues and challenges in the field of data science
While data science has adopted techniques and theories from fields such as math, statistics, and computer
science, its applications concern an expanding number of fields. In this section we introduce some examples of
how data science is used in business and finance, public policy, health care and medicine, engineering and
sciences, and sports and entertainment.
Data Science in Business
Data science plays a key role in many business operations. A variety of data related to customers, products,
and sales can be collected and generated within a business. These include customer names and lists of
products they have purchased as well as daily revenue. Business analytics investigate these data to launch new
products and to maximize the business revenue/profit.
Retail giant Walmart is known for using business analytics to improve the company’s bottom line. Walmart
collects multiple petabytes (1 petabyte = 1,024 terabytes) of unstructured data every hour from millions of
customers (commonly referred to as “big data”); as of 2024, Walmart’s customer data included roughly 255
million weekly customer visits (Statista, 2024). Walmart uses this big data to investigate consumer patterns
and adjust its inventories. Such analysis helps the company avoid overstocking or understocking and resulted
in an estimated online sales increase of between 10% and 15%, translating to an extra $1 billion in revenue
(ProjectPro, 2015). One often-reported example includes the predictive technology Walmart used to prepare
for Hurricane Frances in 2004. A week before the hurricane’s arrival, staff were asked to look back at their data
on sales during Hurricane Charley, which hit several weeks earlier, and then come up with some forecasts
about product demand ahead of Frances (Hays, 2004). Among other insights, the executives discovered that
strawberry Pop-Tart sales increased by about sevenfold during that time. As a result, in the days before
Hurricane Frances, Walmart shipped extra supplies of strawberry Pop-Tarts to stores in the storm’s path (Hays,
2004). The analysis also provided insights on how many checkout associates to assign at different times of the
day, where to place popular products, and many other sales and product details. In addition, the company has
launched social media analytics efforts to investigate hot keywords on social media and promptly make related
products available (ProjectPro, 2015).
Amazon provides another good example. Ever since it launched its Prime membership service, Amazon has
focused on how to minimize delivery time and cost. Like Walmart, it started by analyzing consumer patterns
and was able to place products close to customers. To do so, Amazon first divided the United States into eight
geographic regions and ensured that most items were warehoused and shipped within the same region; this
allowed the company to reduce the shipping time and cost. As of 2023, more than 76% of orders were shipped
from within the customer’s region, and items in same-day shipping facilities could be made ready to put on a
delivery truck in just 11 minutes (Herrington, 2023). Amazon also utilizes machine learning algorithms to
predict the demand for items in each region and have the highest-demand items available in advance at the
fulfillment center of the corresponding region. This predictive strategy has helped Amazon reduce the delivery
time for each product and extend the item selections for two-day shipping (Herrington, 2023).
Data science is utilized extensively in finance as well. Detecting and managing fraudulent transactions is now
done by automated machine learning algorithms (IABAC, 2023). Based on the customer data and the patterns
of past fraudulent activities, an algorithm can determine whether a transaction is fraudulent in real time.
Multiple tech companies, such as IBM and Amazon Web Services, offer their own fraud detection solutions to
their corporate clients. (For more information, see this online resource on Fraud Detection through Data
Analytics (https://openstax.org/r/iabac).)
Data Science in Engineering and Science
Various fields of engineering and science also benefit from data science. Internet of Things (IoT) is a good
example of a new technology paradigm that has benefited from data science. Internet of Things (IoT)
describes the network of multiple objects interacting with each other through the Internet. Data science plays
a crucial role in these interactions since behaviors of the objects in a network are often triggered by data
collected by another object in the network. For example, a smart doorbell or camera allows us to see a live
stream on our phone and alerts us to any unusual activity.
In addition, weather forecasting has always been a data-driven task. Weather analysts collect different
measures of the weather such as temperature and humidity and then make their best estimate for the
weather in the future. Data science has made weather forecasting more reliable by adopting more
sophisticated prediction methods such as time-series analysis, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning
(covered in Time Series and Forecasting, Decision-Making Using Machine Learning Basics, and Deep Learning
and AI Basics). Such advancement in weather forecasting has also enabled engineers and scientists to predict
some natural disasters such as flood or wildfire and has enabled precision farming, with which agricultural
engineers can identify an optimal time window to plant, water, and harvest crops. For example, an agronomy
1.2 • Data Science in Practice 13
consultant, Ag Automation, has partnered with Hitachi to offer a solution that both automates data collection
and remotely monitors and controls irrigation for the best efficiency (Hitachi, 2023).
EXPLORING FURTHER
Using AI for Irrigation Control
See this Ag Automation video (https://openstax.org/r/youtube128) demonstrating the use of data collection
for controlling irrigation.
Data Science in Public Policy
Smart cities are among the most representative examples of the use of data science in public policy. Multiple
cities around the world, including Masdar City in the United Arab Emirates and Songdo in South Korea, have
installed thousands of data-collecting sensors used to optimize their energy consumption. The technology is
not perfect, and smart cities may not yet live up to their full potential, but many corporations and companies
are pursuing the goal of developing smart cities more broadly (Clewlow, 2024). The notion of a smart city has
also been applied on a smaller scale, such as to a parking lot, a building, or a street of lights. For example, the
city of San Diego installed thousands of sensors on the city streets to control the streetlights using data and
smart technology. The sensors measure traffic, parking occupancy, humidity, and temperature and are able to
turn on the lights only when necessary (Van Bocxlaer, 2020). New York City has adopted smart garbage bins
that monitor the amount of garbage in a bin, allowing garbage collection companies to route their collection
efforts more efficiently (Van Bocxlaer, 2020).
EXPLORING FURTHER
Sensor Networks to Monitor Energy Consumption
See how Songdo (https://openstax.org/r/youtube4) monitors energy consumption and safety with sensor
networks.
Data Science in Education
Data science also influences education. Traditional instruction, especially in higher education, has been
provided in a one-size-fits-all form, such as many students listening to a single instructor’s lecture in a
classroom. This makes it difficult for an instructor to keep track of each individual student’s learning progress.
However, many educational platforms these days are online and can produce an enormous amount of student
data, allowing instructors to investigate everyone's learning based on these collected data. For example, online
learning management systems such as Canvas (https://openstax.org/r/instructure) compile a grade book in
one place, and online textbooks such as zyBooks (https://openstax.org/r/zybooks) collect students’ mastery
level on each topic through their performance on exercises. All these data can be used to capture each
student’s progress and offer personalized learning experiences such as intelligent tutoring systems or
adaptive learning. ALEKS (https://openstax.org/r/aleks), an online adaptive learning application, offers
personalized material for each learner based on their past performance.
Data Science in Health Care and Medicine
The fields of health care and medicine also use data science. Often their goal is to offer more accurate
diagnosis and treatment using predictive analytics—statistical techniques, algorithms, and machine learning
that analyze historical data and make predictions about future events. Medical diagnosis and prescription
practices have traditionally been based on a patient’s verbal description of symptoms and a doctor’s or a
